---
layout: docs-creating-nodes
toc: toc-creating-nodes.html
title: Internationalisation
slug: i18n
---

If a node is [packaged](packaging) as a proper module, it can include a message
catalog in order to provide translated content in the editor and runtime.

For each node identified in the module's `package.json`, a corresponding set of
message catalogs and help files can be included alongside the node's `.js` file.

Given a node identified as:

    "name": "my-node-module",
    "node-red": {
        "myNode": "myNode/my-node.js"
    }

The following message catalogs may exist:

    myNode/locales/__language__/my-node.json
    myNode/locales/__language__/my-node.html

The `locales` directory must be in the same directory as the node's `.js` file.

The `__language__` part of the path identifies the language the corresponding files
provide. By default, Node-RED uses `en-US`.

#### Message Catalog

The message catalog is a JSON file containing any pieces of text that the node
may display in the editor or log in the runtime.

For example:

    {
        "myNode" : {
            "message1": "This is my first message",
            "message2": "This is my second message"
        }
    }

The catalog is loaded under a namespace specific to the node. For the node defined
above, this catalog would be available under the `my-node-module/myNode` namespace.

The core nodes use the `node-red` namespace.

#### Help Text

The help file provides translated versions of the node's help text that gets
displayed within the Info sidebar tab of the editor.

### Using i18n messages

In both the runtime and editor, functions are provided for nodes to look-up messages
from the catalogs. These are pre-scoped to the nodes own namespace so it isn't
necessary to include the namespace in the message identifier.

#### Runtime

The runtime part of a node can access messages using the `RED._()` function. For
example:

{% highlight javascript %}
console.log(RED._("myNode.message1"));
{% endhighlight %}

#### Status messages

If a node sends [status messages](status) to the editor, it should set the
`text` of the status as the message identifier.

{% highlight javascript %}
this.status({fill:"green",shape:"dot",text:"myNode.status.ready"});
{% endhighlight %}

There are a number of commonly used status messages in the core node-red catalog.
These can be used by including the namespace in the message identified:

{% highlight javascript %}
this.status({fill:"green",shape:"dot",text:"node-red:common.status.connected"});
{% endhighlight %}

#### Editor

Any HTML element provided in the node template can specify a `data-i18n` attribute
to provide the message identify to use. For example:

{% highlight html %}
<span data-i18n="myNode.label.foo"></span>
{% endhighlight %}

By default, the text content of an element is replace by the message identified.
It is also possible to set attributes of the element, such as the `placeholder`
of an `<input>`:

{% highlight javascript %}
<input type="text" data-i18n="[placeholder]myNode.placeholder.foo">
{% endhighlight %}

It is possible to combine these to specifiy multiple substitutions For example,
to set both the title attribute and the displayed text:

{% highlight javascript %}
<a href="#" data-i18n="[title]myNode.label.linkTitle;myNode.label.linkText"></a>
{% endhighlight %}

As well as the `data-i18n` attribute for html elements, all node definition
functions (for example, `oneditprepare`) can use `this._()` to retrieve messages.
